Bullying Rates Drop May 15, 2015 By Sarah Sisaye Bullying remains a serious
issue for students and their families, and efforts to reduce bullying concern
policy makers, administrators, and educators. According to U.S. Secretary of
Education Arne Duncan, “As schools become safer, students are better able to
thrive academically and socially. The Department, along with our federal
partners and others, has been deeply involved in the fight against bullying in
our nation’s schools.” This is why we are so pleased to share that, after
remaining virtually unchanged for close to a decade, new data indicate that
the prevalence of bullying is at a record low. According to the U.S.
Department of Education’s National Center for Education Statistics latest
School Crime Supplement (SCS) to the National Crime Victimization Survey, in
2013, the reported prevalence of bullying among students ages 12 to 18 dropped
to 22 percent after remaining stubbornly around 28 percent since 2005. “The
report brings welcome news,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell said. “Parents, teachers, health providers,
community members and young people are clearly making a difference by taking
action and sending the message that bullying is not acceptable. We will
continue to do our part at HHS to help ensure every child has the opportunity
to live, learn and grow in a community free of bullying.” Bullying can occur
anywhere and to any student. There are three types of bullying: physical,
relational (or social) and verbal. Research shows that students who are
bullied are more likely to struggle in school and skip class. They are more
likely to abuse drugs and alcohol, be depressed, and are at higher risk of
suicide. Since 2010, the Department of Education along with the Departments of
Health and Human Services and Justice, have acted to combat bullying and
cyberbullying through work such as StopBullying.gov. However, it is the work
of educators, bus drivers, parents, and students, that have taken a stand to
put an end to bullying. Your hard work and dedication is making a difference!
To learn about bullying and how to take action to end bullying, please visit
StopBullying.gov and join the conversation on the StopBullying.gov Facebook
page! This post originally appeared on Homeroom Blog. By Sarah Sisaye,
Management and Program Analyst in the Office of Elementary and Secondary
Education, U.S. Department of Education

