U.S. Department of Education: Education Department Releases Updated Financial
Aid Shopping Sheet to Provide Students with Additional Transparency in College
Costs December 12, 2013 By U.S. Department of Education Press Release: Nearly
2,000 schools have voluntarily committed to using the Shopping Sheet Contact:
Press, (202) 401-1576, press@ed.gov Today, the U.S. Department of Education
released an updated version of the administration’s financial aid model award
letter, known as the Shopping Sheet, and announced that nearly 2,000
institutions of higher education have voluntarily committed to using this
important consumer tool.Unveiled in July 2012, the Shopping Sheet is a
resource developed jointly by the Education Department and the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to make it easier for students to
understand the type and amount of aid they qualify for, and easily compare aid
packages offered by different higher education institutions. The Shopping
Sheet gives students a standardized, yet personalized form that clearly spells
out—before students enroll—how much grant money they will receive and how much
they may need to take out in loans to cover out-of-pocket expenses. When the
tool was released in 2012, Secretary Duncan sent an open letter to college and
university presidents asking them to voluntarily adopt the Shopping Sheet, to
replace or supplement their financial aid award letters for the 2013-14 school
year. “I am pleased to report that nearly 2,000 institutions—representing 8.1
million undergraduates—have now voluntarily committed to using the Shopping
Sheet,” said U.S. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan. “The Shopping Sheet
helps prospective students navigate the often daunting process of selecting
and paying for higher education. Providing students and families with clear,
easy-to-compare information about college costs is an important part of the
administration’s efforts to improve college access and affordability.” Since
the Shopping Sheet’s initial release, the Department has received feedback
from students, guidance counselors, and financial aid administrators on ways
to modify the Shopping Sheet, which are now reflected in the revised version,
effective in the 2014-15 school year. In addition to minor language changes to
improve clarity, the Shopping Sheet has added a glossary to better explain
financial aid terms. A detailed breakdown of the updates is available in a new
blog post by the Department. While the primary goal of the Shopping Sheet is
to enable students and families to better compare aid offers between
institutions, it also provides a host of outcome information about each
school, including graduation, loan default, and median borrowing rates—all
aimed at providing as much information as possible to make informed decisions
about where to attend college. The Obama Administration has set a goal for our
nation to lead the world in college completion by the end of the decade, and
making college more affordable is critical to reaching that goal. The revised
Shopping Sheet announced today is one of several consumer disclosure tools
developed by the Obama Administration to ensure that students are equipped
with the information they need when investing in higher education. Others
tools include the College Scorecard, college affordability and transparency
lists, financial awareness counseling tool, and the financial aid toolkit. For
more information on the Shopping Sheet, including a list of participating
institutions, visit www.ed.gov/financial-aid-shopping-sheet View original U.S.
Department of Education press release. By U.S. Department of Education

