Teamwork + Data = Big Gains at Jones Elementary School January 14, 2015 By
U.S. Department of Education This blog post originally appeared on Homeroom
Blog, the Official Blog of the U.S. Department of Education. Students at Jones
Elementary School in Springdale, Arkansas face many potential obstacles to
learning, including poverty, hunger, and trouble speaking and reading English.
Eight years ago, only 26 percent of students were reading on grade level. With
effective use of data, and real collaboration, the principal and teachers at
Jones raised that to 73 percent. “Poverty isn’t destiny,” says Principal
Melissa Fink. Her team is overcoming students’ challenges by believing that
every child can succeed at very high levels and creating a culture of
excellence. Teachers across the nation come to school every day hoping to make
a difference in their students’ lives, and they are making meaningful changes
in their classrooms. At Jones, they are doing it with a whole new level of
teamwork. As teacher Jennifer Mills put it, “I used to think about just my
classroom. Now, I care about the collective whole of fourth grade.” With help
from principals like Fink and other educators, teachers can collaborate and
set goals to challenge themselves and their students. In this new video, see
how teachers at Jones are helping their students excel. Improving Education:
The View from Jones Elementary School shows how teachers and the school
principal work together to encourage their students to succeed. Fink and the
teachers at Jones Elementary School work as a team to receive feedback, and
they listen to and learn from each other. They also put data to work for them.
“We make all decisions at our school based on what the data tell us. We’re not
just talking about test score data,” says Fink. “We’re talking about the data
that teachers are collecting on a day-to-day basis in their classroom.” We
will continue highlighting extraordinary educators doing remarkable things in
classrooms nationwide in our video series. To learn more, visit our Partners
in Progress page. U.S. Department of Education

