Federal Student Aid Tool Publishes FAFSA Completion Numbers for the High
School Graduating Class of 2015 February 10, 2015 By Todd May Tool provided
completion numbers for over 25,000 high schools across the country in 2014.
Online toolkit provides resources for educators to boost completion rates,
apply for aid and more. In March 2012, the U.S. Department of Education,
Federal Student Aid (FSA) announced the release of an innovative FAFSA
Completion Tool to help guidance professionals, school administrators, and
practitioners both track and subsequently increase Free Application for
Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) completions at high schools across the country.
Subsequent enhancements to the FAFSA Completion Tool provided not just the
FAFSA submission and completion totals for any high school for the current
year, but also totals for the same time the year before and other key
benchmark dates. Building on those enhancements, the 2015 version of the FAFSA
Completion Tool provides updated information on a weekly basis during the peak
FAFSA application period. By posting FAFSA submission and completion totals
weekly, counselors and administrators will have access to current data to more
accurately gauge the impact of outreach efforts and identify successful local
strategies. Prior to publishing this data, the only source of data on FAFSA
completions that high schools had was from self-reported student surveys,
which were highly unreliable. Through the FAFSA Completion Tool, educators
have real-time access to reliable data to track FAFSA submission and
completion and gauge their progress in increasing FAFSA completion. Key
studies have indicated that FAFSA completion correlates strongly with college
enrollment, particularly among low-income populations. While FAFSA data is
important, we encourage high schools to use this data as one component of a
comprehensive college access and completion program within their school. To
assist educators, counselors, and others with this and other aid awareness and
loan repayment efforts, the Department created the Financial Aid Toolkit. The
Toolkit consolidates financial aid resources and content into a searchable
online database, making it easy for individuals to quickly access the
information they need to support their students. The Toolkit provides
counselors with access to valuable resources such as how to host a FAFSA
completion workshop. For our social media savvy customers, it includes a host
of FAFSA completion social media resources, including sample Tweets, Facebook
posts, videos, blog posts, infographics, and other components which can be
used to promote FAFSA completion. The Tool is a critical component of
President Obama’s FAFSA Completion Initiative and this year, local completion
efforts are getting a boost from Mrs. Obama’s “FAFSA Completion Challenge,” a
video competition the First Lady recently launched to encourage more high
school students to complete the FAFSA. In addition to determining eligibility
for federal student aid, which includes Pell grants, federal student loans,
and work study opportunities, many states, institutions, and private
organizations rely on the FAFSA to determine eligibility for non-federal
sources of aid. Last year, over one million high school seniors did not submit
the FAFSA, making them ineligible for federal grants and loans as well as most
state-based and institutional aid. When students complete the FAFSA, they help
themselves and make a positive contribution to their school, communities, and
states. The promise of the FAFSA Completion Tool lies in its simplicity and
its use of current data to effectively measure the success of FAFSA completion
efforts. Last year, the Tool provided FAFSA submission and completion data for
the senior classes at over 25,000 high schools in all 50 states, Washington,
DC, and all U.S. territories. For more information on the Tool and to search
updated FAFSA Completion Tool data by high school for the senior class of
2015, visit StudentAid.gov/FAFSA-HS-Data. By Todd May, Director of
Communication Services, Federal Student Aid

