Education in the World May 30, 2013 By admin The Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) collects information from around the world
on education, population, economic output, productivity, labor market, and
innovation themes to highlight differences within countries. This data is
featured on Data.gov in cooperation with the Department of State. The OECD
PISA (Programme for International Student Assessment), created in 1997,
reviews the reading, mathematical, and scientific literacy of 15 year olds
around the world. The PISA program goes beyond the examination of whether
students have mastered their school’s curriculum and asks if there knowledge
will translate into skills needed in adult life. Explore more at OECD, which
promotes policies that will improve the economic and social well-being of
people around the world. Education in the Nation United States Education
Dashboard President Obama has established a goal that, by 2020, the United
States will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the
world. Meeting this goal is vital to our long-term economic security and to
preparing young people and adults to be active citizens. Reaching the
President’s goal will require comprehensive education reforms from cradle to
career, beginning with children at birth, supporting them through high school
and postsecondary education, and helping them to succeed as lifelong learners
who can adapt to the constant changes in the demands of the global economy. To
monitor the country’s progress towards reaching our goal, the U.S. Department
of Education presents the United States Education Dashboard. The Dashboard is
intended to spur and inform conversations about how to improve educational
results. College Completion Toolkit More than half of all new jobs in the next
decade will require a postsecondary certificate or degree. Accordingly,
boosting the number of college graduates should be a central goal in every
state’s workforce and economic development plan. Raising college completion
rates should be a central part of the strategy for reaching that goal. The
Nations Report Card Informs the public about the academic achievement of
elementary and secondary students in the United States. Report cards
communicate the findings of the National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP), a continuing and nationally representative measure of achievement in
various subjects over time. 2020 Goal U.S. to have the highest proportion of
college graduates in the world. Learn more.

