U.S. Department of Education: College Ratings Listening Tour: College Value
and Affordability December 19, 2013 By Jamienne Studley A system of college
ratings will help students choose among colleges and encourage institutions to
improve. This fall, the Department of Education set out across the country to
listen to everyone who wanted to talk about how we can make college more
affordable and a solid investment for families and taxpayers. In August the
President outlined an ambitious agenda to combat rising college costs and
improve the value of education so students and the nation can achieve our
goals of growth, opportunity and economic strength. He asked the Department of
Education to reach out widely as we create a system both to help students and
families choose colleges and eventually to reward colleges’ performance on key
measures of opportunity and completion that are important to the nation. He
also asked us and to honor his “firm principle that [the Administration’s]
ratings be carefully designed to increase, not decrease, the opportunities for
higher education for students who face economic or other disadvantages.”
–August 22, 2013, Buffalo, NY. Acting Deputy Secretary of Education Jim
Shelton gets feedback during an open forum at Louisiana State University. So
we fanned out across the country to listen. First, we gathered national
student organizations, because students are at the heart of this effort to
improve education and put it within everyone’s reach. In November, we held
four Open Forums in the Los Angeles area at California State University-
Dominguez Hills, George Mason University in the Washington, D.C., area, the
University of Northern Iowa in Cedar Falls, Iowa, and Louisiana State
University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. We also arranged meetings in Chicago,
Boston, Richmond, Las Vegas, and Annapolis, MD, before wrapping up the Fall
portion of our outreach earlier this week in Davis, CA. We gathered a wide
range of perspectives from college leaders, students and faculty from all
levels and sectors, and from parents, business people, college counselors,
education associations, and policy analysts. In all, we held more than 55
meetings with thousands of participants. We also invited comment from the
public, and continue to welcome ideas, atcollegefeedback@ed.gov. What have we
learned? It was no surprise that people want the option of college for
themselves and their families, that choosing among colleges is hard, and that
people worry – a lot — about the cost. Many students and groups that advise
low-income students about college responded positively to the plan for ratings
that would incorporate measures of college access, affordability and outcomes.
And it was very good to hear, over and over and from all quarters, how many
people share the President’s fundamental commitments to affordability, access,
completion, innovation and transparency. Here are some of the most
enthusiastic and personal comments we heard in support of the plan to develop
a college ratings system: “Parents and students shouldn’t have to guess. We
salute the Secretary’s call for a ratings system – nutrition labeling for
colleges.” J.B. Schramm, College Summit “There is an urgency in developing
solutions…Perhaps the worst thing we could be doing right now is to do
nothing.” King Alexander, President, Louisiana State University “We whole-
heartedly stand behind a ratings system…It would encourage institutions to
start innovating and create more effective practices to get their students
through the pipeline.” Allison De Lucca, Southern California College Access
Network “The Administration is right to demand results, not rhetoric, and
metrics for accountability.” American Council of Trustees and Alumni At the
same time, we heard many probing questions, thoughtful suggestions, and
serious concerns about the design of the system, its reliability and clarity,
and the effects it might have. They were glad to hear that colleges will be
grouped by mission or other criteria to generate reasonable peer groups; that
the system is envisioned to generate broad performance categories, not rank-
ordered lists; and that we want to give weight to whether schools are
improving. Stakeholders said they appreciate the Department seeking advice
before designing the system, but not having a specific proposal they could
react to led to speculation and some concern. We received many comments that
recognize the challenges the Department faces in shaping a successful ratings
system. We were encouraged to consider a range of issues, including: Promoting
access, not endangering it: In recognizing schools that do a good job of
providing access and achieving strong completion results, it will be important
to avoid what many called “unintended consequences,” such as creating
incentives to not accept high-risk students or to push students to less-
demanding programs. Outcomes measures: We were encouraged to consider a broad
view of outcomes that go beyond degree completion to include successful
transfer, completion of occupational certificates, and persistence, as well as
to choose metrics relating to employment and income after college very
carefully. Intangible outcomes of education: A ratings system is not expected
to capture all of the significant benefits of a college education, including
academic success and capacities for civic engagement, critical thinking and
problem solving, and lifelong learning. We were urged to make very clear that
college contributes to the success of our democracy, on the broad level, and
to individuals’ quality of life and ability to participate in civic life on
the personal level. Institutional comparisons: Many comments noted the
complexity of designing meaningful peer groups, especially given the variety
of colleges and the fact that students with choices often compare colleges
across categories, such as by location or program. State role: Recognizing
that about 75% of students attend public institutions of higher education,
many comments reflected the common pattern of diminishing state investment in
colleges and universities so that students and the federal government are
shouldering more of the cost. Institutions and students asked whether it would
be possible to reflect variations in state support so that colleges and
results could be compared in light of those differentials. Others noted that
the ratings system could be a useful tool for state policymakers, as well as
college leaders. Consumer accessibility: The effectiveness of a new rating
system depends on whether the data and interface are friendly and easy to use
for all families. The Department plans to test the system with consumers,
colleges and other stakeholders to assure that the presentations are fair and
appropriate and tell a clear and useful story. The Department is now
evaluating all the comments we received, while working with data experts,
soliciting technical recommendations, and assessing existing ratings systems
in higher education and other fields. Our goal is to publish a draft of the
ratings system in mid-2014 for public feedback and improvement. The President
has charged us to issue the ratings in time for students and others to use it
for the 2015-16 school year. We continue to look forward to receiving your
comments, particularly those which both pose a question and focus on a
specific recommendation to address the issue. Secretary Duncan has urged
stakeholders to be candid and constructive. We understand the concerns we have
heard and recognize the challenge of developing a system that is helpful to
students and their families and not harmful to quality institutions and our
diverse higher education sector. With continued constructive feedback and
collaboration, we can produce a more useful, smarter system that promotes
opportunity and individual and national goals through informed higher
education choices. Jamienne Studley is Deputy Under Secretary of Education.
View original post on Homeroom, the official blog of the U.S. Department of
Education By Jamienne Studley, Deputy Under Secretary of Education

