My Brother’s Keeper Data Jam: Old World Values with New World Strategies and
Tools August 13, 2014 By Jim Shelton When President Obama launched the My
Brother’s Keeper Initiative, he called on Americans to make sure that every
American — including our boys and young men of color — can reach their full
potential. On August 2, over 150 people showed up early on a Saturday morning
for a “Data Jam” hosted by the U.S. Department of Education, in partnership
with Georgetown University and the Beeck Center for Social Impact and
Innovation. The Jam took place at Georgetown Downtown in Washington, D.C. The
My Brother’s Keeper Data Jam brought together a diverse group of high school
students, teachers, data scientists, data visualization experts, developers
and community and non-profit leaders. The aim was to find new and better ways
to use data to highlight opportunities and create solutions that can improve
life outcomes for all students, including boys and young men of color. It was
a powerful day. A group of young men started us off with compelling spoken
word performances that reminded all in attendance of the incredible challenges
they face and enormous potential they hold. While acknowledging the role they
had to play in changing the narrative of their own lives, they made plain the
real danger and risks they face each day and expressed frustration in having
to overcome the negative stereotypes that are applied to them and their peers.
The attendees then broke into teams focused on the six universal goals
outlined in theMy Brother’s Keeper 90 Day Task Force Report– entering school
ready to learn; reading at grade level by third grade; graduating from high
school ready for college and career; completing post-secondary education or
training; successfully entering the workforce; and reducing violence and
providing a second chance. The teams were designed to capitalize on the range
of perspectives and expertise among the participants. The student and teacher
team members almost uniformly commented that they had never before been
engaged in developing or even asked about tools and resources that impact
their daily lives. Nearly 20 teams worked through the day on crafting
compelling ways to show data and creative solutions to chronic challenges –
ranging from strategies to reduce preschool suspensions and expulsions to
websites that enable students to find career paths and the required education
or training to access them. At the end of the day, seven teams were voted by
other participants as having the most promising ideas, and those teams
committed to moving these and other ideas forward. We are excited about the
ideas that emerged and anxiously await seeing these ideas in action. We are
even more excited about the lessons learned from the day and how they will
improve future Data Jams that I am sure other colleges and universities will
be clamoring to host. But we are most excited by the demonstration of
commitment and unbelievable energy of the individuals and teams that
participated. With no cash prizes or press coverage, these people leaned in
and showed a big part of what My Brother’s Keeper is all about – people coming
together to help our young people and the country. The Data Jam simply applied
a little technology and innovation to that simple but profound concept and
left many of us feeling inspired. Yet, nothing was as inspiring to me as the
time I had during lunch with the youth in attendance. They asked how I got
where I am; how I avoided and dealt with the violence in my neighborhood; how
best to survive and excel on campuses where they, for the first time, might
come across few people with similar backgrounds and experiences; and many
other questions about life as they know it and imagine it. They shared their
stories of struggle and triumph as well as their plans for the future and the
impact they plan to have on the world. Their questions and their stories
reminded me, as one young man said in the morning session, they are
“overcoming every day.” So if we create ladders of opportunity, they are more
than willing to climb. And, that, too, is a big part of what My Brother’s
Keeper is all about. The My Brother’s Keeper initiative is a collaborative,
multi-disciplinary approach led by an interagency federal task force to build
ladders of opportunity and unlock the full potential of our young people,
including boys and young men of color. Learn more about My Brother’s Keeper.
The Beeck Center for Social Impact & Innovation at Georgetown University
exists to inspire and prepare students, faculty and global leaders with the
necessary skills to generate and innovate solution-based social change both
locally and internationally. It will promote collaborative spaces for
fostering innovation and provide experiential opportunities to pragmatically
impact the social sector. Learn more about the Beeck Center. This blog post
originally appeared on the U.S. Department of Education Homeroom Blog. By Jim
Shelton, Deputy Secretary at the U.S. Department of Education and Executive
Director of the My Brother’s Keeper Task Force

