Data in the Classroom May 30, 2013 By admin Education Resources The Department
of Education’s “Federal Resources for Educational Excellence” project is a
wealth of information. Selected offerings for teachers, parents and students
include: Helping Your Child Learn Math: activities for parents to help
children (K-5th grade) have fun learning geometry, algebra, measurement,
statistics, probability and other subjects (Department of Education). Project
Links: web-based modules for teaching advanced math methods, probability and
statistics, differential equations, discrete mathematics, linear systems, and
calculus (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute/ National Science Foundation).
Collected Learning Units in Mathematics: more than 200 instructional units in
arithmetic, algebra, calculus, data analysis, fractions, geometry, number
theory, pre-algebra, pre-calculus, probability and statistics (National
Security Agency). Journal of Online Mathematics and its Applications:
articles, learning modules, “mathlets,” reviews of online resources, and a
developers’ area (Mathematical Association of America/National Science
Foundation). Statistics Online Computational Resource: online aids (including
interactive graphs and calculators ) for probability and statistics education,
technology-based instruction, and statistical computing (UCLA, supported by
multiple agencies). Teaching with Data Simulations: activities to help
students visualize abstract statistical concepts and see dynamic processes
behind the gathering, analysis, and interpretation of statistics (Science
Education Resource Center at Carleton College/National Science Foundation).
Data in the Classroom: curriculum guides for using real scientific data to
investigate earth processes. (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration). Other government sites offer the following: The National
Center for Education Statistics Kids’ Zone, includes data-related activities
for kids. Fedstats.gov has a kids’ page called “Map Stats for Kids” that
includes activities related to statistics and geography. This site also
includes a list of federal agencies with statistics-related pages for kids.
The National Agricultural Statistics Service offers K-12 lesson plans. Other
resources: PBS Teachers website. A search for “data” on the site resulted in
262 resources, including offline activities, interactive activities, videos
and lesson plans related to data collection and analysis for K-12 students and
their teachers. The National Science Teachers association website includes an
extensive (100+) assembly of free resources for science teachers: Resources
range from lesson plans to web-based activities to videos and more, on all
aspects of science. Many include mathematics as well. Microsoft in Education
offers lesson plans for a variety of subjects, including math, science and
social studies, all of which include lesson plans that involve data, include
creating a generation-gap survey and tracking and analyzing the resulting
data; researching acid rain their state; and charting the effects of
earthquakes on buildings. Teaching Ideas is a website for teachers working
with children ages 5-11 created by U.K. primary school teacher Mark Warner,
and includes a page with resources for teaching about databases and
spreadsheets. Infant Resources: This site is a compendium of teaching
resources for elementary schoolchildren assembled by U.K.-based Claire Cook
(who provides no biographical information). The “Data Handling” page includes
real-world games and lessons. A Canadian site,“Math Lessons Today”, includes
games and worksheets for elementary schoolchildren. Sites for Teachers, lists
sites for all K-12 levels on all topics, ranked by popularity, the site
claims. Watch Know lists 158 videos for kids in its “Probability and
Statistics” category, including 37 under “data analysis.” K-12 Education
Data.gov is also working with the International Science and Engineering Fair
to bring Data.gov as a research tool and resource to K-12 students across the
globe as they create, innovate, and learn about science through their research
and in their schools. At this year’s International Fair in Los Angeles on May
8-13, Data.gov will be making resources available for kids to explore, learn,
and analyze government data, and encourage them to create apps and views of
that data. This year Data.gov also continues their sponsorship of the USA
Science and Engineering Festival. At last year’s event on the Mall in
Washington, D.C. 5,000 students explored datasets ranging from health to
energy through Data.gov apps and mashups that made learning fun. Universities
Data.gov in the Classroom highlights 11 universities and colleges across
America that are using the information and lessons of Data.gov to help future
generations learn about government data, how to use it, and help create the
apps that enable others to do so as well. Harvard University, Dr. Karim
Lakhani, Data.gov: Matching Government Data with Rapid Innovation, Harvard
Business Case Study New York Law School, Professor Beth Noveck, Democracy
Design Workshop Do Tank, ORGPedia: Corporate Intelligence and Accountability
for the 21st Century and Economic Impact of Open Gov Data New York University,
Professor Christina Goodness, Information and Technology for Socio-political
Change Oregon State University, Dr. Dawn Wright, Geographic Information
Systems and Science Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Professor Peter Fox,
Data Science Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Professor Jim Hendler, Linking
Open Government Data (tutorials, apps, and mashups) Syracuse University,
Professor Ines Mergel, Government 2.0 Temple University, Steven L. Johnson,
Data and Knowledge Management University of California, Berkeley, Professor
Yee, Mixing and Remixing Information University of Michigan, Library, Access
to Governmental Datasets at Data.gov Yale University, Dr. Laura DeNardis and
Dr. Nicholas Bramble, Access to Knowledge Shout Out To Teachers Using Data.gov
in the classroom? Created a cool app? Developed a lesson plan? Tell us your
story, let us feature your class, let us come to your school!

