Games for Learning Summit: Expanding the Conversation Between Educators and
Game Designers April 20, 2015 By Antero Garcia and Chad Sansing Cross-posted
from Medium. Whether it is using quick warm-ups like Game of Phones or highly
immersive experiences with Mario Kart and Minecraft, digital games can be
powerful motivators for learning. It is with this in mind that we are eager to
expand the conversation between teachers and game developers. The U.S.
Department of Education and Games for Change, with support from the
Entertainment Software Association, will host the Games for Learning Summit
April 21 at the 2015 Games for Change (G4C) Festival. With more than 250
participants, including nationally recognized educators, the designers of some
of today’s most popular video games, and members of the U.S. Department of
Education, we are hopeful that this event will encourage collaboration focused
on the learning needs and interests of young people in the U.S. Collaborating
and designing with the learning interests of young people in mind requires a
shift in thinking from all stakeholders. Based on the conversations we’ve had
with teachers and students, there is a hunger for better games that support
better learning today. With the recent release of The Ed Tech Developer’s
Guide, the pathways for developing for impact are clearer than ever. At the
beginning of the school year, the two of us (along with a handful of amazing
teachers) spent a weekend enmeshed with teams of game designers at the White
House Education Game Jam. Focused on games that could provide powerful
learning resources for schools, we have continued to be optimistic about the
results that such collaboration can yield. A recent game-design project in
Chad’s classroom highlights some of what game-based learning has to offer us
as teachers and students. Inspired by games ranging from Geometry Dash to
Sissy’s Magical Ponycorn Adventure, students working in teams of four
completed their own Scratch games like Wasteland Adventures, World
Championship Soccer, and Sanic Pong. Each ‘studio’ of four students
brainstormed genres, tropes, and mechanics for games they wanted to create and
play. Then they got to work. Programmers started to code. Artists worked with
platforms like Piskel and Google Draw. Sound Engineers scoured freesound.org
and Sound Bible for sound effects and composed theme music with Online
Sequencer. Student project managers kept everyone working and talking with one
another through shared docs and folders. The project helped students develop
media literacy, soft skills like collaboration, and technical skills like
managing an online repository of A/V assets, to say nothing of the logic,
math, reading, and writing skills they demonstrated in navigating tutorials,
communicating online, and building their games. Students even discussed gender
norms in character design and traditional gaming narratives. Game-based
learning isn’t about consuming a product to pick up a fact or two; it’s about
learning to analyze or produce pieces of interactive media that require
critical thinking, persistence, and problem-solving to master, critique, play,
and make. Now, with several White House Education Game Jam alumni and friends
coming to the Games for Learning Summit, we are excited about focusing on
articulating the thinking, dialogue, and spaces for collaboration between
developers and educators. We’re looking forward to continuing conversation far
beyond the Games and Learning Summit. We need to work together to answer
questions like: How can we help one another make and use games to fulfill
educational needs in the classroom? How can we put the best interactive
content in the hands of students for the most meaningful educational
experiences — those focused on discovery and decision-making? Let’s figure out
game-changing ways to harness the power of play for the work of learning in
schools. Join the conversation on Tuesday by watching the live stream and
Tweeting your contributions with #G4L15. Antero Garcia (@anterobot) is a
Teaching Ambassador Fellow at the U.S. Department of Education and teaches
pre-service teachers as an Assistant Professor at Colorado State University.
Chad Sansing (@chadsansing) teaches technology and project-based learning at
the BETA Academy in Staunton, Virginia. By Antero Garcia, Teaching Ambassador
Fellow at the U.S. Department of Education, and Chad Sansing, BETA Academy in
Staunton, Virginia

