Ed Games Week Highlights the Emergence of Video Games in Education September
23, 2014 By Ed Metz, Russell Shilling and Mark DeLoura Ed Games Week wrapped
up with a 48-hour Education Game Jam that brought together over one hundred
veteran and independent game developers, teachers, and students. (Photo
credit: U.S. Department of Education) Games and play are a central part of
childhood and can stimulate creativity and learning. As technology grows as a
tool for teachers, one question has been: what role might educational video
games play in the classroom? Today, increasing numbers of teachers are
incorporating games to supplement and enrich classroom instruction. In
addition, students of all ages are developing their own games, as showcased in
competitions and hackathons in communities across the country. Ed Games Week
brought the discussion on educational games to Washington, D.C. The Office of
Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) and the U.S. Department of Education (ED)
collaboratively planned a series of events including the Ed Games Expo, the Ed
Games Workshop, and the White House Education Game Jam. The Ed Games Expo The
Ed Games Expo showcased 25 newly developed learning games developed with
funding from the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) programs at ED’s
Institute of Education Sciences (ED/IES SBIR) and other federal programs. More
than 150 attendees met face-to-face with the developers and played games that
covered a range of topics – from STEM, history, and foreign languages – and
used a wide variety of genres for gameplay. For example: Addimal Adventure
challenges children to solve mathematical equations with support of friendly
characters. Zoo U helps grade school students navigate a series of challenging
social situations. Reach for the Sun encourages deep understanding of
photosynthesis as students grow a virtual sunflower from seed to full plant.
For more, check out the Office of Educational Technology YouTube channel: Ed
Games Workshop The Ed Games Workshop brought together the Expo game developers
and a team of federal experts. Workshop collaborators strategized exciting
possibilities to create regional, national, or even international STEM game
competitions featuring games that motivate as well as teach, such as through
an X-Prize model. For more, see this article on the Clinton Foundation blog.
The White House Education Game Jam Ed Games Week wrapped up with a 48-hour
Education Game Jam that brought together over one hundred veteran and
independent game developers, teachers, and students with the goal of creating
educational games that make challenging K-12 topics easier for students to
learn and for teachers to teach. Organized by the White House and Department
of Education, developers were challenged to develop playable prototypes during
the event. On Monday, Sept. 8, Game Jam participants presented videos of their
games and demonstrated the prototypes at the White House. Twenty-three
educational games were developed over the weekend including: Grub Run, a
health and fitness game by Team Pixelopus President of the Galaxy, a game
about the dynamics of U.S. presidential elections by Team 1st Playable Land
Grab, a game highlighting a conceptual social behavioral model called the
tragedy of the commons, by Team Filamentarians You can find videos of all the
game prototypes on the Office of Educational Technology YouTube channel: ED is
committed to tracking the emergence of technology-based games in education as
a way to enrich in-and-out of classroom learning opportunities for students.
Follow @OfficeofEdTech and @IESResearch on Twitter for the latest! Ed Metz is
a developmental psychologist and the Program Manager for the Small Business
Innovation Research Program at the U.S. Department of Education’s Institute of
Education Sciences. Russell Shilling is an experimental psychologist and the
Executive Director of STEM Initiatives at the U.S. Department of Education.
Mark DeLoura is Senior Advisor for Digital Media at the White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy. This blog post originally appeared on the U.S.
Department of Education Homeroom Blog. By Ed Metz, Russell Shilling and Mark
DeLoura

